French, https://watchingamerica.com/WA/2021/05/06/joe-biden-promises-massive-new-aid-to-americans/

The American president unveils the broad outlines of his “American Families Plan.” He foresees devoting $1.8 trillion to education, child care and the extension of assistance to the unemployed. But he will have to convince his own camp as well as the opposition.
To celebrate his 100 days in the White House — this Friday, officially — Joe Biden has presented a new investment plan. It is in fact the second part of the infrastructure plan, more socially oriented. The American Families Plan promises $1.8 trillion to provide assistance to the most fragile populations: $1 trillion for new investments and $800 billion in tax credits. These funds are in addition to the $2.3 trillion provided for in the framework of the infrastructure plan. A total of more than $4 trillion, which would constitute the most important public initiative since World War II, “an ambitious, once in a generation investment,“ according to the White House.
Biden was supposed to give the details of the plan during his first address to Congress this Wednesday evening, but he has already unveiled its broad outlines. The proposal includes an important investment in education. Access to community colleges and public universities of good standing would be made free for all — a measure that would cost $109 billion. Assistance would be given to students attending universities historically serving minorities. Those universities would also obtain subsidies to compensate for [the present] insufficient number of professors: The need is estimated at more than 100,000 new instructors nationwide.
More Paid Vacation
Households in difficulty would also be able to receive aid for the care of young children ($225 billion is anticipated). Supplementary paid leave would also be provided upon the birth of a child or for medical reasons ($225 billion, as well). The nutrition program, which enables children to have free meals at school, would be expanded.
Lastly, targeted assistance, adopted at the time of the COVID-19 crisis, would be made permanent. This is the case for a tax credit granted to those who have lost their jobs. The tax credit that would benefit parents would also be increased to $3,600 per child for children under six years of age, and $3,000 for those over six years.
Heated Negotiations
These measures would be financed by new tax revenues. Biden wants, first of all, to provide more resources to the administration to fight tax avoidance. The tax rate for the richest Americans would return to 39.6%, as opposed to the current 37%, and capital gains would be taxed at the same level for those earning more than $1 million per year. Finally, he wants to put an end to a tax deduction exploited by members of investment funds.
Biden will nevertheless have to prove himself convincing in order to have these reforms accepted by his own camp and by the opposition. The Republicans have already pulled out a counter-proposal to his infrastructure plan, at one quarter the cost. While they claim to be open to the renovation of roads and bridges, they are much more skeptical when it comes to social assistance.
The plan is also criticized by a segment of the left, which is waiting for measures to reduce the cost of medications or the extension of health coverage. “Everyone in America should have guaranteed access to health care,” stated Democratic Rep. Pramila Jayapal from the state of Washington, who also chairs the Congressional Progressive Caucus.