French, https://watchingamerica.com/WA/2020/12/20/joe-biden-the-lame-duck/

The president-elect is well, but he could be better. At the end of November, he fell while playing with his dog, Major, in the garden of his Wilmington, Delaware home and fractured his right foot. Therefore, he is now moving with hesitant steps toward his inauguration, set for Jan. 20 in Washington, D.C. The irony of the story: There are now two unstable presidents of the United States. Across the Atlantic, the expression “lame duck” is used when an elected official is at the end of their term — in this case, a certain Donald Trump — and their successor is already known.
Fashionistas won’t have much to say about his dazzlingly boring gray shoes. Conspiracy theorists, on the other hand, will find themselves completely speechless when faced with this. For several days now, Joe Biden has worn a black orthopedic boot that some theorists suspect of not protecting an injury at all, but actually concealing an electronic bracelet fitted in the aftermath of his secret arrest as part of an investigation which will see him sent to prison. If this is the case, then why does the Democrat now wear a simple sneaker that exposes his ankle?
Seeing as conspiracy theorists know everything, why wouldn’t we be interested in their insights into Biden’s pocket square? White and folded into three ridiculous points, this can’t reasonably be a simple desire for sophisticated clothing. So what’s behind this origami? Which secret society is the president-elect claiming membership of with this accessory? And which icy triptych do the three small points represent? We think it’s “inelegance,” “corniness” and “bad taste,” but that’s obviously too simple.
The pair of shoes on the feet of one of Biden’s security detail has neither charm nor quality, but it allows us to take stock of the current legislation on brown. If the age-old rules of 19th-century elegance, “no brown in town” or “no brown after 6 p.m.,” only amuse a few dusty gentlemen, one rule suffers no exception: Light brown leather shoes (experts call the color “whiskey,” “chestnut,” “wagtail”) are prohibited, before or after 6 p.m., in cities as well as the countryside, thank you very much.
On his way to a local TV station, one photo shows Biden getting out of a black U.S. Secret Service Chevrolet SUV. In a few weeks, he will be changing the car for the famous “Beast” or “Cadillac One,” the presidential car. While in this exceptional sedan, built on the chassis of a van and weighing close to nine tons, he will be able to benefit from a host of conveniences and accommodate up to seven people … unless, of course, he is sent to jail by then.
