https://www.thestar.com/opinion/contributors/2021/04/29/after-successes-at-home-joe-biden-prepares-to-tackle-global-rivals-china-and-russia.html

Perhaps not surprisingly given his age, Joe Biden is clearly a man in a hurry.
He is governing the United States as if the clock is ticking — for him, for his country and for the world at large. At stake, he is arguing, is the fate of democracy itself in this 21st century.
One hundred days into his presidency — celebrated on Thursday — Biden has already had remarkable success in domestic policy. The pandemic seems finally to be coming under control after nearly a year of criminal indifference to the crisis by Donald Trump, and as a result, the U.S. economy is on its way to a historic rebound.
Biden’s track record so far in foreign policy is less clear, but it is early and there are reasons. He has spent most of these first days trying to undo the catastrophes of his predecessor — regarding the climate crisis, relations with traditional allies, support for international organizations and re-engagement with Iran.
But significantly for the long term, Biden is revealing a strategy than is much bolder and more ambitious than his lifetime reputation as a cautious “moderate” would suggest.
His calculation is laser-focused on simplicity: first, to prove to Americans that governments and democracy can truly make their lives better; then, to use that success as a lesson for the wider world that democracy — not dictatorships — can meet the challenges of this century.
To a skeptical world, it won’t be an easy case to make. For many global allies, the Trump era was America at its ugliest: a self-absorbed disruptor that coddled dictators, undermined democratic institutions and engaged in what seemed like treason both at home and abroad.
It weakened the United States and its government — and yes, that was largely the goal — but it also undermined democratic governments in Europe, Asia and Latin America that were confronting their own right-wing, populist threats.
To make it even more mystifying, what still frightens U.S friends worldwide was the surprising willingness of many Americans to turn their backs — with the snap of a finger — on decades of respected American values.
So sure, Trump is gone — for now. But the stench from his presidency still lingers on.
And that is the world that Joe Biden inherited when he was sworn into office in January.
In his first address as president to a joint session of Congress on Wednesday evening, Biden seemed far less tentative than he appeared to be during his inaugural speech in January.
Referring to the domestic terrorist attack on the U.S. Capitol building in Washington on January 6, Biden spoke of a country that had “stared into an abyss of insurrection and autocracy, of pandemic and pain,” but was now on the road to renewal.
With democracy under siege around the world and authoritarian powers like China growing in influence, Biden said that “we have to prove democracy still works. That our government still works, and we can deliver for our people … We have to show not just that we’re back, but that we’re back to stay.”
Citing conversations that he has had with Chinese President Xi Jinping, Biden said that Xi is “deadly earnest about (China) becoming the most significant, consequential nation in the world.”
Biden stressed that the U.S. must “win the 21st century” but indicated in his speech that his priority is to improve life in the U.S. for Americans. By doing that, he said, it will refute suggestions from the country’s adversaries that American inequalities and polarization are “proof that the sun is setting on American democracy.”
Biden’s plan to accomplish this is both ambitious and expensive — although the costs would be borne by corporations and the wealthy.
He offered a glowing vision of an activist government that would deliver “once in a generation” benefits to middle- and working-class Americans. These included child care, free community college, electric cars, universal preschool and the largest jobs plan since the Second World War.
But beyond the rivalry with China over the merits of democracy, Biden’s administration will soon need to focus more on its global challenges. And as the horrors of the pandemic recede and the U.S. economy rebounds, his foreign-policy goals will need to be articulated.
There is a sense that Biden and his team have been playing for time as they have focused on domestic priorities, but that honeymoon will soon end.
The pressure is building regarding Russia’s Vladimir Putin over his handling of Ukraine and the Russian dissident Alexei Navalny.
There are growing tensions with China over its threats over Taiwan, its attacks on Hong Kong democracy and the persecution of China’s Uyghur Muslim minority.
And in this post-Trump era, there is urgency being felt in bringing some sense of sanity again to the Middle East.
History may record that the struggle between democracy and autocracy will define the 21st century — just as the Soviet/American cold war shaped the 20th century.
But in the meantime, there are many other potentially dangerous crises taking shape worldwide that will require the attention of the U.S. president — who, this time, actually seems to want to be a constructive force in the world.
