https://nationalpost.com/opinion/derek-h-burney-judge-joe-biden-by-what-he-does-not-who-he-isnt

More than halfway through his first 100 days in office, U.S. President Joe Biden basks in a honeymoon based largely on the fact that he is not Donald Trump. That, and an unduly supportive media, are the main reasons he was elected.
Biden scored a major victory getting a $1.9-trillion COVID relief bill adopted by Congress. Dubbed “the most progressive piece of legislation in American history,” it was supported exclusively by Democrats in the House and the Senate and received no Republican votes. Biden was undoubtedly mindful of the futile eight months that the Obama administration spent trying to get some Republican support for Obamacare, a setback that stymied much of that administration’s legislative track record thereafter. Many Republicans thought that the COVID package was excessive and unnecessary. The economy is already showing strong signs of recovery. Only nine per cent of the total amount is directly related to COVID relief and $1 trillion of funding previously approved has not yet been spent.
With no pre-nuptial agreement declared, Bill and Melinda Gates' split leaves billions in…
While Biden’s approval ratings of about 50 per cent are higher than Trump ever achieved, storms are brewing domestically and internationally that could change matters. Opening the southern border to asylum seekers with scant advance preparation is creating havoc for communities in Texas and Arizona near the Mexican border, sapping momentum from the COVID victory. U.S. immigration officials are scrambling frantically to process and house a more than 100 per cent increase in traffic, including a surge of unaccompanied minors. Few are checked for COVID before being released into America. The chaos was eminently predictable and, as long as it continues, there will be little chance for real immigration reform.
The chaos was eminently predictable
However, apart from the border fiasco, Biden is emboldened by his success on COVID and seems determined to go all out with major parts of his agenda — on infrastructure (which may gain some bipartisan support), on tax increases for corporations and wealthy Americans (which will not but would help pay for some of the largesse) and possibly his Green plan as well. If implemented, efforts to weaken the filibuster rule requiring 60 votes on most legislation would make Senate approval easier. But it may also create an even more toxic environment in Congress.
Internationally, attempts to mend fences with allies are more a matter of tone than substance, notably with Canada and the EU. Seventeen U.S. states are suing the administration for killing the Keystone Pipeline, which is certainly more than our government is doing.
Greater self-reliance is the order of the day for Europe. Having spurned the administration’s attempt to stop its investment agreement with China, the EU plans to spend tens of billions of euros from its COVID recovery fund to reduce dependence on U.S. and Chinese semi-conductor technologies. Canada should consider following suit in company with Britain and Australia, among others.
A makeshift housing camp for migrants seeking asylum hearings is seen in Tijuana, Mexico, on March. 21, 2021. U.S. President Joe Biden says he plans to visit the U.S.-Mexico border “at some point” for a first-hand look at conditions as the entry of migrants seeking refugee status in the U.S. rises sharply. PHOTO BY ERIC THAYER/BLOOMBERG
Biden is undoing much of Trump’s legacy in the Middle East. Delaying contact with the leaders of Israel and Saudi Arabia while initiating a dialogue with Iran could be problematic. Instead of building on the Abraham Accords between Israel and the UAE, Bahrain, Sudan and Morocco, Biden’s actions may jeopardize those agreements. He froze arms sales to the UAE, promised as part of the deal, halted military aid to the Saudi war in Yemen and rescinded the terrorist designation applied to the Houthis (in Yemen) by president Trump. By releasing an intelligence assessment indicating that Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman (MBS) was responsible for planning the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi and by insisting on speaking to the frail king instead of MBS, who is actually in charge, the U.S. has weakened relations with the Kingdom.
No one knows what Biden’s changes in Mideast policy may portend. Israel may have to consider tactics on its own about the threat from Iran. Just as ominous, Saudi Arabia may use its advantage as OPEC’s swing oil producer to cut output and prop up prices. The result would be an increase in American gasoline prices that had already risen to US$2.89 per gallon on March 19 from US$2.40 at the end of January. Along with the cancellation of Keystone and the halting of leases on federal lands for oil and gas (about 22 per cent of U.S. production) some predict increases over US$3 as the post-COVID summer driving season approaches. That will not sit well with American consumers nor with voters.
Relations with Russia plummeted when, in sharp contrast to the tone of his predecessor, Biden described President Vladimir Putin as a “killer.” Putin recalled his ambassador from Washington and challenged Biden to a one-on-one debate.
Relations with China — the overriding foreign policy and security challenge for America — are similarly fractious. On March 18 and 19, when Secretary of State Antony Blinken and National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan met their Chinese counterparts in Anchorage, Alaska, it quickly became a rocky, no-holds-barred public spat, with each side reprimanding the other in an unusual public display of acrimony. Rather than a “reset,” China’s mocking attack on American democracy and the U.S. litany of Chinese misdeeds suggests a period of heightened competitive tension between the two superpowers, with not much pragmatic diplomacy.
Eric Schmidt, the former CEO of Google who led a National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence (AI), observed that the U.S. may lose its lead on AI soon unless it acts more competitively. China is already the global leader in face recognition, electronic commerce and 5G telecommunications. Schmidt acknowledged that China has “more money, smart people and lots of ambition.” His commission concluded that the U.S. needs to double its R&D spending by $30 billion per year to maintain its lead on AI but this is not a challenge that the administration can implement as readily as can the authoritarian and centrally controlled China.
Biden has already signalled support for funding semi-conductor fabrication plants in the U.S. along with a 100-day review of supply chain vulnerabilities for semi-conductors, batteries, pharmaceuticals and strategic materials. Given the frozen state of Sino-Canadian relations Ottawa should be contemplating similar action to counter China’s pursuit of technological dominance and its coercive economic diplomacy. Because semi-conductors are vital to thousands of products on which we rely the U.S. and its allies need to do more to insulate their supply chains from China.
Biden’s underlying advantage is that he is not Trump. He is helped by open warfare in the Republican party between Trump loyalists and those who prefer to move beyond the Trump era. The rhetoric is vitriolic. Five moderate Republican senators have already signalled that they will not run in 2022. Others may follow and no one really knows what Trump intends to do or the extent to which tax and other court challenges may further damage his reputation.
Despite the euphoria from the success of his COVID package, questions persist about the level of Biden’s mental acuity. Public events are tightly scripted, and he will host his first formal press conference on March 25. As events unfold at home and abroad, Biden should eventually be measured more by what he actually does rather than by who he is not.
