https://nationalpost.com/opinion/kelly-mcparland-after-years-of-giving-putin-a-pass-the-u-s-is-finally-taking-the-russian-threat-seriously-again

Maybe Russian President Vladimir Putin is just an old softy after all, and realized that killing Alexei Navalny was not the sort of thing civilized countries do.
Or maybe not. After facing weeks of protests and a growing regime of sanctions, it could be the Russian president concluded that silencing Navalny, without necessarily taking his life, was preferable to dealing with the inevitable uproar that would follow his death.
Do people who buy their first electric vehicle buy a second one after?
In any case, at some point in the 24 days that followed Navalny going on a hunger strike, the pressures that built behind Putin’s best-known and most effective opponent became sufficient to persuade Russia’s one-man government to let him live. Navalny got the decent medical care he’d been demanding and announced the end of his strike.
It appears Moscow blinked, though a ruler who reasons that the costs of openly killing off troublesome critics might temporarily outweigh the benefits is hardly worth an outpouring of praise. Word that Navalny was recovering had hardly appeared when news arrived that Putin’s forces planned to systematically shut down the broad network Navalny had built, on the basis that his activities represent a terrorist threat.
That’s Russia after two decades of Putin’s rule. An organization established to fight corruption is deemed a danger to the survival of the nation. And perhaps it’s true: it would appear Putin and his clique of cronies are genuinely terrified by what Russians might do if they ever got the chance to fight back against the epic fraud and racketeering that keeps Putin in power.
Despite his usual display of cockiness, Putin has any number of reasons to be nervous. The number of “excess deaths” from COVID tops 400,000; official efforts to downplay the crisis were exposed when a woman recorded video of a morgue stacked high with corpses after arriving to collect her father’s body. Attempts to frighten Ukraine by massing troops on its border have failed so far, and the inability of neighbouring Belarus to halt protests against its Russian-backed regime represent a worrying sign for Moscow.
Perhaps most dismaying for Putin is the end of the Trump administration in the United States and the vast room for manoeuvre it provided gleeful U.S. rivals in Moscow and Beijing. The former U.S. president offered anti-democratic forces a priceless opportunity to seize ground abandoned by Washington, which they used to great effect, interfering in elections, spreading misinformation, offering succour and support to regimes in Syria and Iran, engaging in cyber-warfare and gulling leaders in developing countries with financial deals that shackled their future to Russia and China in return for some short-term benefits.
The happy days ended when Donald Trump lost to President Joe Biden in November. Since then the sanctions have been piling up: the most recent targeted more than 30 Russian entities over accusations of cyber espionage, and included a ban on U.S. financial institutions buying bonds priced in rubles.
Biden warned that any Russian retaliation would be met move for move. A concurrent tightening of sanctions on Belarus has worried Russian oil firms enough that they may be forced to stop sending oil to Belarusian importers. Biden proposed a summit with Putin to sort things out, but it’s already been made clear that the curious admiration Trump held for the world’s swaggering autocrats no longer holds in Washington.
While the European Union declined to ramp up its own sanctions as Navalny’s health deteriorated, French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian said the EU would hold Putin and other Russian authorities directly responsible if he died in prison. It may have been more than coincidence that Navalny ended his hunger strike a day later, after authorities finally granted him access to medical specialists, though still barring him from his personal doctor.
In a direct challenge to Putin’s authority, supporters continued staging mass protests throughout his ordeal, despite official bans and thousands of arrests. Having failed to halt the protests, an obedient Moscow court this week declared Navalny’s anti-corruption drive a threat to “constitutional order” and approved a drive to shut down his string of offices throughout the country. If Putin can’t kill the man, he’ll settle for eliminating his network.
Appreciation of the threat Putin represents has grown with the times. Previous U.S. presidents, from George W. Bush through Barack Obama and ultimately Donald Trump, sought to varying degrees to get along with Moscow, grossly underestimating the depth of the rot they were dealing with.
Biden has so far shown no willingness to follow that pattern. His approach represents an admission that 30 years of policies since the end of the Cold War have been a failure. It’s about time. Fighting back against despots like Putin can’t get serious until the years of backsliding end. Canada should move quickly to get on board.
